Git: The Very Basics
====================

This is a barebones introduction to the version control system `git`.
It teaches you just enough to successfully do the homeworks for this course.
It is assumed that you are using the virtual machine image and are already familiar with the very basics of the command line (`cd`, `mkdir`, and so on).

Git in 5 minutes
----------------

1. Open the Terminal.
   The icon is on the desktop.
1. If it doesn't exist yet, create a folder `homeworks` in the home directory with `mkdir homeworks`.
1. Execute `cd homeworks` to move into the homeworks folder.
1. To clone a git repository `example-repo` at URL `xyz`, run `git clone xyz`.
   Never clone a repository into an existing repository (that's why we created a separate folder `homeworks` in the home directory).
1. With `ls`, you should now see a new folder `example-repo`.
1. Edit the contents of the folder to your liking.
1. Once you are done, run `git add .` to *stage* all changed files.
1. Then run `git commit -m "put some message here"` to *commit* all changed files.
1. Finally, push the commit to the repository you cloned from with `git push origin master`.


Github in 5 minutes
-------------------

You can only push commits to a repository that you are allowed to write to.
On Github, this is only the case for repositories that you have created yourself or that somebody has given you write access to.
You do **not** have write access to the homework repositories, so you cannot push your commits there.
Instead, you have to

1. create a fork of the repository for the homework you want to do
1. clone the fork with `git clone`,
1. make changes as before and commit them,
1. push your changes to the fork with `git push origin master`, and
1. file a pull request against the original repository.

Each homework repository explains this process in detail and links to the relevant passages of Github's help section.
